ZPU Simulator and Assembler

This describes the reference Python simulator for the core ZPU ISA and the
minimal assembler used to feed it. Only the required (hardware) instructions
are covered; emulated instructions are out of scope for now.

Machine model

Memory is a flat byte array, default 4096 bytes, addressed big-endian. Words
are 32 bits. Word accesses ignore the low two address bits. All arithmetic is
unsigned modulo 2^32.

On reset the program is loaded at address 0, PC is 0, and SP is the memory
size. The stack grows downward: a push first decrements SP by 4 then writes the
word, a pop reads the word then increments SP by 4. The top of stack is the
word at SP.

Execution fetches one opcode byte at PC, executes it, and advances PC by one,
except for POPPC and EMULATE which set PC directly. BREAKPOINT halts the
simulator. A step limit guards against runaway programs.

Offsets

LOADSP and STORESP take a byte offset that is a multiple of 4 in the range
0..124. ADDSP takes a byte offset that is a multiple of 4 in the range 0..60.
All offsets are relative to SP at the start of the instruction.

    LOADSP 0    duplicates the top of stack
    STORESP 0   drops the top of stack
    ADDSP 0     doubles the top of stack

Assembler syntax

One instruction per line. A semicolon begins a comment. A token ending in a
colon defines a label at the current address; labels may share a line with an
instruction. Integer operands accept decimal or 0x hex and, for IM, a leading
minus.

    breakpoint pushsp poppc add and or load not flip nop store popsp
        no operand
    im N            push a signed 32-bit constant, or a label address
    loadsp N        byte offset, multiple of 4, 0..124
    storesp N       byte offset, multiple of 4, 0..124
    addsp N         byte offset, multiple of 4, 0..60
    emulate N       vector 0..31

IM with a numeric operand assembles to the shortest legal run of IM bytes,
most significant 7 bits first, with the first byte sign-extended. IM with a
label operand always assembles to a fixed five-byte run so that label addresses
do not depend on their own values.

The hardware merges adjacent IM bytes into one constant, so the assembler
inserts a NOP between two consecutive IM instructions to keep each one a
separate push.
