zpu soc: a zpu core attached to mmio peripherals

this describes a small system-on-chip built around the zpu simulator in
sim/zpu.py: ram plus a set of memory-mapped peripherals, so zpu machine
code can talk to a device by reading and writing ordinary memory
addresses with the existing load/store instructions. no changes are made
to sim/zpu.py; the soc replaces the cpu's mem object with a bus that
dispatches to ram, to vram, or to a device's registers depending on the
address.

the addresses themselves -- where ram ends, where each device's
registers live, where vram is -- are a fixed contract, not something
this soc happens to have picked: docs/zpu_memmap.txt is the specification
every backend (this python simulator, a future qemu machine, a future
fpga build) implements identically, so a zpu binary or a piece of the
stdlib in soc/ needs no knowledge of which backend it is actually running
on. this document covers the bus mechanics and the virtio-specific
device that lives at one of those fixed addresses; see zpu_memmap.txt for
the addresses themselves and for the uart and video devices.

byte and halfword loads/stores (loadb/storeb/loadh/storeh) are only valid
against ram and vram. the mmio window is word-only, matching the real
virtio-mmio spec's requirement that registers are accessed as native
4-byte values -- true of every device on this bus, not just virtio ones.


why this deviates from the virtio specification

upstream virtio fixes the byte order of every register and every
virtqueue structure to little-endian, regardless of the guest cpu's own
endianness, and packs some virtqueue fields (flags, next) into 16 bits
each to save space on real hardware.

zpu is big-endian and has no sub-word addressing benefit to gain from
packing (it has no registers; everything is loads, stores, and stack
slots). there is also no real hardware or OS on the other end of this
device -- it only ever talks to zpu guest code written for it. so this
implementation:

    - encodes every mmio register and every virtqueue field as a plain
      32-bit value in the same big-endian byte order load/store already
      use, instead of forcing little-endian.
    - gives every virtqueue field, including ones the spec packs into 16
      bits, its own full 32-bit word, so guest code only ever needs word
      load/store to read or write any field.

the register offsets, field names, and overall protocol (feature
negotiation, status bits, descriptor chaining, avail/used rings) are
otherwise taken directly from the virtio 1.1 mmio transport. a real
virtio driver would not understand this device and this device would not
understand a real virtio driver; the protocol shape is kept for
familiarity, not for interoperability.

zpu also has no interrupt mechanism. a real virtio driver would wait for
an interrupt after writing queuenotify; a driver here must poll the used
ring's idx field directly until it changes. interruptstatus and
interruptack are still implemented so the register file is complete and
so a future cpu revision with interrupts would not need device changes.


mmio register file

offsets are relative to the device's base address. all registers are 32
bits.

    0x000  magicvalue        r   0x74726976
    0x004  version           r   2
    0x008  deviceid          r   device type (console = 3)
    0x00c  vendorid          r   1 (implementation-defined, arbitrary)
    0x010  devicefeatures    r   bits 0..31 or 32..63 of the device's
                                  feature bitmap, selected by
                                  devicefeaturessel; this implementation
                                  offers no features, so always 0
    0x014  devicefeaturessel w   0 selects the low half, 1 the high half
    0x020  driverfeatures    w   bits the driver is accepting (ignored;
                                  there is nothing to negotiate)
    0x024  driverfeaturessel w   selects which half driverfeatures sets
    0x030  queuesel          w   selects the queue the queue* registers
                                  below refer to
    0x034  queuenummax       r   maximum queue size for queuesel's queue
    0x038  queuenum          w   queue size the driver is configuring
    0x044  queueready        rw  1 once the driver has finished
                                  configuring the selected queue
    0x050  queuenotify       w   driver writes a queue index here after
                                  adding buffers to that queue's avail ring
    0x060  interruptstatus   r   bit 0: a used buffer is ready
                                  bit 1: device configuration changed
    0x064  interruptack      w   driver writes back bits to clear them
    0x070  status            rw  device status (see below); writing 0
                                  resets the device
    0x080  queuedesclow      w   descriptor table address, low 32 bits
    0x084  queuedeschigh     w   descriptor table address, high 32 bits
                                  (always 0; zpu addresses are 32 bits)
    0x090  queueavaillow     w   avail ring address, low 32 bits
    0x094  queueavailhigh    w   avail ring address, high 32 bits
    0x0a0  queueusedlow      w   used ring address, low 32 bits
    0x0a4  queueusedhigh     w   used ring address, high 32 bits
    0x0fc  configgeneration  r   increments when the config space changes
    0x100  config space      device-specific, see below

status bits (0x070), matching the spec's meaning:

    bit 0  acknowledge   driver has noticed the device
    bit 1  driver        driver knows how to drive the device
    bit 2  driver_ok     driver is ready to drive the device
    bit 3  features_ok   driver has finished feature negotiation
    bit 7  failed        something went wrong

the device only processes queuenotify while driver_ok is set. a driver
that writes queuenotify before finishing the status handshake is ignored,
the same as on real hardware.

the expected driver sequence to bring up a queue:

    1. write status = acknowledge
    2. write status = acknowledge | driver
    3. read devicefeatures (optional; this device has none to offer)
    4. write driverfeatures = 0, write status |= features_ok
    5. read back status and confirm features_ok is still set
    6. for each queue: write queuesel, read queuenummax, write queuenum,
       write queuedesclow/high, queueavaillow/high, queueusedlow/high,
       write queueready = 1
    7. write status |= driver_ok


virtqueue layout

a split virtqueue is three structures the driver allocates in ram and
tells the device about via the queuedesc/queueavail/queueused registers.
queuenum is the number of descriptor table entries and the number of
slots in each ring; it must be a power of two no larger than
queuenummax. every field below is a separate 32-bit word, in address
order, with no padding.

descriptor table, queuenum entries of 5 words (20 bytes) each:

    word 0   addr low 32 bits of the buffer's address
    word 1   addr high 32 bits (always 0)
    word 2   len       length of the buffer in bytes
    word 3   flags     bit 0: next, bit 1: write
    word 4   next      index of the next descriptor in this chain,
                        meaningful only if flags has next set

flags.write means the device writes into this buffer (used for receive
buffers); without it the device only reads the buffer (used for transmit
buffers). a descriptor chain is one or more descriptors linked by next,
read or written in order to form one logical buffer.

avail ring, header plus queuenum entries:

    word 0       flags   unused, always 0
    word 1       idx     number of descriptor chains the driver has
                          ever published, modulo 2^32
    word 2 + i   ring[i] head descriptor index of the i'th published
                          chain, for i in 0 .. queuenum-1

the driver publishes a chain by writing its head index into
ring[idx mod queuenum] and then incrementing idx. the device tracks how
much of the ring it has already consumed on its own; nothing in memory
records that.

used ring, header plus queuenum entries of 2 words each:

    word 0           flags  unused, always 0
    word 1           idx    number of chains the device has completed
    word 2 + 2*i     id     head descriptor index of the i'th completed
                            chain
    word 3 + 2*i     len    bytes the device read or wrote for that chain

the device completes a chain by writing {id, len} into
ring[idx mod queuenum] and incrementing idx. a polling driver watches
this idx for changes.


virtio console device

device id 3, two queues fixed by the protocol (single port, no
multiport feature):

    queue 0  receiveq   device writes into driver-supplied buffers;
                         carries data arriving from outside the guest
    queue 1  transmitq   device reads driver-supplied buffers; carries
                         data the guest is sending out

config space (offset 0x100 from the device base), provided for
completeness though this implementation does not use multiple ports or
window sizing:

    0x100  cols          u32, 0
    0x104  rows          u32, 0
    0x108  max_nr_ports  u32, 1
    0x10c  emerg_wr      u32, write a single character here for an
                          out-of-band emergency write (this
                          implementation forwards it to the same output
                          as a transmitq byte)

on transmitq notify, the device walks every newly available descriptor
chain, concatenates the bytes from every descriptor in the chain (using
each descriptor's len, ignoring the write flag since transmit buffers are
device-read), and hands the result to the device's output callback (the
soc's default callback writes the bytes straight to stdout). it then
completes the chain on the used ring with len equal to the number of
bytes consumed and sets interruptstatus bit 0.

receiveq buffers are completed as input becomes available rather than on
notify: when bytes are fed into the device from outside the guest, it
copies as many bytes as fit into the oldest available receiveq
descriptor chain it has not yet consumed, completes that chain on the
used ring with len equal to the number of bytes copied, and sets
interruptstatus bit 0. a notify on queue 0 simply tells the device new
buffers exist to receive into; it does not by itself produce data.


a c driver for the secondary channel

soc/zpu_virtio_console.h and soc/zpu_virtio_console.c are a small driver
for this device specifically, meant to be compiled by the zpu clang and
linked into a guest c program that wants the richer channel, so it does
not need to drive the virtqueues by hand the way hello_virtio_console.s
does. the stdlib every other guest program should use for the terminal
is soc/zpu_console.h/.c instead, documented in zpu_memmap.txt alongside
the uart device it drives -- this driver is only for programs that
specifically want virtio (a future block device, say) rather than the
terminal.

    void zpu_virtio_console_init(void);
    void zpu_virtio_console_putc(char c);
    void zpu_virtio_console_write(const char *data, int len);
    void zpu_virtio_console_puts(const char *s);
    int  zpu_virtio_console_getc(void);

init brings the device up and configures both queues with a single
descriptor each (queuenum 1): the driver is fully synchronous, one
transaction in flight at a time, which keeps it simple at the cost of not
overlapping transmit and receive. it must be called once before any of
the other functions.

write and putc block until the device has consumed the buffer (polling
the used ring, since there is no interrupt to wait on); the caller gets
the buffer back safe to reuse or let go out of scope as soon as the call
returns. getc blocks until a byte is available.

the receive descriptor's buffer is a fixed 64-byte internal buffer the
driver refills from one at a time and reposts once drained; a caller
never sees or touches it directly.

the descriptor table and avail/used rings the driver uses for each queue
are ordinary file-scope arrays inside zpu_virtio_console.c, not fixed
addresses -- the compiler places them whenever it lays out the program,
the same as any other global, so there is no possibility of them
colliding with the guest program's own data the way a hardcoded address
could.

a buffer handed to the device only through its address, with nothing in
the visible c code reading it back, looks dead to the compiler: nothing
proves the store into it is ever observed, so an otherwise unremarkable
optimization can delete the store and hand the device a pointer to
whatever was there before. the putc function hit exactly this -- the
one-byte local it points the device at must be volatile, or the
character never actually gets written before the device reads it. the
same reasoning applies to the receive buffer, which is written only by
the device's "dma" into guest memory and never by anything the compiler
can see: it is also volatile, even though nothing has yet caught a
miscompile there. this whole class of bug is one more reason the uart
driver -- a plain register write, no address ever handed to anything --
is the better choice for anything that is not specifically after
virtio's richer semantics.


layout in this repository

    soc/memmap.py
        the fixed addresses, mirroring docs/zpu_memmap.txt
    soc/mmio.py
        the bus: ram, vram, and the mmio window's fixed device slots
    soc/uart.py
        the terminal device
    soc/video.py
        the framebuffer device
    soc/virtio.py
        the mmio register file and virtqueue helper, shared by every
        virtio device
    soc/virtio_console.py
        the virtio console device described above
    soc/zpu_soc.py
        wires a zpu core to the bus and its devices; provides a
        command-line entry point
    soc/test_soc.py, test_uart.py, test_video.py, test_run_c.py
        tests
    soc/hello_uart.s
        a hand-written zpu program that prints a message over the
        terminal
    soc/hello_virtio_console.s
        the same, over the secondary channel
    soc/zpu_console.h, soc/zpu_console.c
        the terminal's c driver
    soc/zpu_virtio_console.h, soc/zpu_virtio_console.c
        the secondary channel's c driver
    soc/hello.c
        a guest program using the terminal's c driver

run the demos with:

    python3 soc/zpu_soc.py soc/hello_uart.s
    python3 soc/zpu_soc.py soc/hello_virtio_console.s --virtio-console

both print the same message, the second one over the secondary channel
(which is not attached by default -- see --virtio-console above):

    hello from zpu!
