zpu gdb stub

a gdb remote serial protocol (rsp) server wrapping sim/zpu.py, so a
stock gdb can attach to a running zpu program over tcp and set
breakpoints, step, and inspect registers and memory. no changes to
sim/zpu.py and no patch to gdb itself are needed.


scope

breakpoints by address, single instruction stepping, continuing,
register and memory read/write, and stopping a runaway continue with
ctrl-c. no watchpoints, no hardware breakpoints, no multi-threading (the
zpu has one execution context), no disassembly or backtraces (both need
real architecture support in gdb, which this stub does not have -- see
limitations at the end).


why this pretends to be i386

the first design tried to describe the zpu's real register set (just pc
and sp -- there is no general-purpose register file) through gdb's
target description mechanism (qxfer:features:read), the documented way
to hand gdb an architecture it has no built-in knowledge of. every
architecture actually built into gdb -- arm, riscv, i386, or1k, all of
them tried -- rejects a target-supplied description that does not match
its own hardcoded register expectations, regardless of osabi. there
appears to be no architecture gdb ships that accepts an arbitrary,
foreign register set this way, at least not in gdb 15.1; "target
description" turns out to mean "refine a set gdb already expects",
never "define one from nothing".

rather than patch gdb (out of scope for this repository -- see
CLAUDE.md), the stub instead speaks the wire format of an architecture
gdb already knows natively end to end: i386. gdb needs no target
description at all for i386, so none of the above matters; the user
runs `set architecture i386` once before connecting and everything
past that point is genuinely zpu, not i386, except the byte layout of
the g/p/P packets. gdb's own $pc and $sp convenience registers already
resolve to i386's eip and esp, so pc/sp inspection reads naturally
without the user ever typing eip or esp.

this was found by direct experiment against a real gdb and gdb-multiarch
15.1 (`set debug arch 1` shows exactly which registers a candidate
architecture's gdbarch_init rejects and why), not by reading gdb's
source, so it is possible some other gdb version or some architecture
not tried here would have accepted a genuine target description; if
that turns out to be true later, this whole section and the register
encoding in gdbstub.py are the two things to revisit.


registers

i386's register list for the g/G/p/P packets is fixed by the protocol,
not by anything in this stub: eax, ecx, edx, ebx, esp, ebp, esi, edi,
eip, eflags, cs, ss, ds, es, fs, gs, regnums 0 through 15. only regnum 4
(esp, i.e. the zpu's sp) and regnum 8 (eip, i.e. the zpu's pc) are real;
every other register always reads as zero and a write to one is
accepted and silently discarded.

`set endian big` is required after `set architecture i386` (see
"running it" below) -- i386 is natively little-endian and gdb assumes
that unless told otherwise, but zpu is big-endian both in its actual
memory and in how this stub encodes register values, so without it
both registers and memory would come back byte-reversed.


memory

m and M map directly onto the zpu's flat byte-addressable memory
(sim/zpu.py's mem array), with no translation. reading or writing
through gdb (e.g. x/8xw $sp to look at the operand stack, since sp
points at the top of it) is exactly the same as the simulator's own
read_word/write_word, just addressed a byte at a time as the protocol
requires. memory is unaffected by the i386 masquerade above -- it was
never architecture-specific to begin with, only registers were.


breakpoints

software breakpoints (z0/Z0) are a set of addresses the stub checks
before executing each instruction during a continue, not a memory patch
-- there is no need to save and restore an original opcode the way a
real gdbserver does, since the stub already controls the fetch/decode/
execute loop directly. continuing from a stop that landed exactly on a
breakpoint executes one instruction unconditionally first, so the same
breakpoint does not refire immediately; every step after that checks
the breakpoint set before executing.

single stepping (s) always executes exactly one instruction regardless
of breakpoints, since the caller explicitly asked to move forward by
one.


stop reasons

the zpu's own breakpoint instruction (opcode 0x00) is what every example
and test program in this repository already uses to halt -- it sets the
simulator's halted flag. a continue or step that causes the cpu to halt
this way is reported to gdb as the process exiting (W00), ending the
session, matching how that instruction is used everywhere else in this
project. a continue or step that stops because it hit a breakpoint gdb
itself inserted is reported as a trap (S05), keeping the session open
for inspection and a further continue. ctrl-c from gdb during a
continue is reported as S02.


protocol notes

packets are $<data>#<checksum>, checksum is the sum of the data bytes
mod 256 as two lowercase hex digits; every packet received is acked
with + before it is processed, matching the rsp default (no-ack mode is
not negotiated). memory and register data always use plain hex
encoding, never run-length compression, so none of the data the stub
sends or expects to receive needs $, #, *, or } escaping.

during a continue, the stub polls the socket for an incoming ctrl-c
(a bare 0x03 byte, outside any $...# packet) every few thousand
instructions rather than after every single one, since checking a
socket is far slower than a python function call.


running it

    python3 gdb/gdbstub.py prog.s --port 1234

then, from gdb (or gdb-multiarch, if the local gdb was not built with
i386 support -- check with `gdb -batch -ex "set architecture i386"`,
an unrecognized-architecture error means it was not):

    (gdb) set architecture i386
    (gdb) set endian big
    (gdb) target remote localhost:1234
    (gdb) break *0x10
    (gdb) continue
    (gdb) info registers
    (gdb) x/8xw $sp
    (gdb) stepi

prog.s is assembled the same way sim/assembler.py's own command line
does; a raw binary image also works if the file does not end in .s.


limitations

gdb cannot disassemble zpu instructions (its decoder genuinely thinks it
is looking at i386 machine code) and cannot unwind a call stack (no
debug info from the compiler, and no zpu-aware frame analysis in gdb).
backtraces and disas are not available; everything else in the scope
above is.

gdb's own architecture-generic heuristics occasionally read one word
above the current stack pointer while single-stepping, seemingly as
part of best-effort frame tracking; on a program that has pushed
little or nothing yet, that read can land exactly at the top of
whatever --memory size was given and fail with "cannot access memory".
this is not a bug in the stub -- that address is genuinely one word
past the end of the configured memory -- it just means a shallow stack
at the moment of a stepi can trip a probe gdb makes for reasons this
stub has no control over. it goes away as soon as the stack is a little
deeper, which in practice is almost immediately.
